---
layout: default
title: Boeing 737 Max Ethical Analysis
description: An indepth analysis of ethics in the series of Boeing 737 Max Crashes
---


---

# Boeing 737 Max Ethical Analysis

#### Background
The 737Max aircraft was introduced to the public by Boeing in August 2011. Although widely successfully and operated worldwide the original 737 airframe was start to be dated and held back due to the it age; it has been running since the 1960s. In December of 2010, Airbus announced the A320neo, a modern update to one its most popular airframes as well. This announcement was met with praise and business grew for Airbus. As Boeing’s biggest competitor, this success drove Boeing to abandon plans for a completely new line of aircraft and instead pursue at refresh of the 737 family [1]. This resulted in the introduction of the 737Max just a few month after the A320neo was introduced with similar engines and other improvements, which quickly became one of Boeing fastest-selling airliner [1]. 

The success was short lived, as just one year after entering service, a 737Max operated by Lion Air crashed just 13 minutes after takeoff, with everyone onboard dying.  The investigation revealed a control system MCAS was activated 26 times in ten minutes and forced the nose of the plane downwards. The investigation placed blame on Boeing and FAA for this incident. Following this tragedy, some safety directives were created and information publicized to allow pilots to understand what this system does and how to fix it when it is not working properly. However, despite these changes, another 737Max operated by Ethiopia Airlines crashed just 6 minutes after takeoff, leaving no survivors. With yet another tragic crash, all 737Max aircrafts worldwide were grounded and the design was heavily blamed. 

#### Engineering Decisions
As mentioned earlier, Boeing was severely pressured by the commercial success of their biggest competitor, Airbus. Moreover, the A320neo directly competes with the 737’s market segment. Under such pressure, Boeing decided to place more modern LEAP-1B engines on the preexisting 737 frame. This introduced several engineering challenges. The new engines were bigger than the old engines, and the 737 frame did not have sufficient ground clearance. To address this issue Boeing place the new engines were mounted higher and more forward than the previous engines. This new position introduces a vortex at high angles of attack, and due to the center of gravity being behind this vortex location, the plane would pitch higher, making the angle of attack even higher[2]. To suppress this behavior, Boeing decided to implement their Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS). This system, using an angle of attack sensor, would automatically force the pitch of the plane downwards. 

#### Ehtical Analysis
Although the MCAS system on its own may not be an unethical system, the way it was implemented can certainly deemed unethical. Firstly the facts of the situation must be analyze and what stakeholder groups are affected by them. 

Boeing decided to use the same 50-year old airframe but place modern efficient engines. This affects the Boeing engineers along with airlines and passengers. The engineers are tasked with placing a bigger engine that does not fit the same way the old engines did, introducing a design challenge [1]. The airlines and passengers should benefit from lower operational costs. Boeing decided to use their military application MCAS system on this plane to address poor flight dynamics [2]. The stakeholders of this decision are primarily the pilots as this system directly affects their control over the plane. Boeing promised airlines no additional training is necessary for the crew when switching to the Max version [3]. Again the stakeholder group primarily affected by this are pilots, who have a different control system acting. Lastly to fulfill their promise, Boeing purposely hid mentions of MCAS from pilot handbooks. Moreover, to avoid regulatory overhead, the MCAS system was presented to the FAA in a dishonest and fragmented way [4]. The stakeholders affected by these decisions are the pilots and regulators, which cascades to the airlines and passengers as well.
These material facts and the stakeholder groups affect raise ethical questions: should market competition be prioritized over safety? Should Boeing disclose the use of MCAS? And Should FAA show favoritism and leniency towards Boeing by allowing internal regulation? These questions should first be answered in an ideal-world and then factor in real world issue and barriers that prevent this outcome. 

Immediately it is clear that safety of the airplane should be prioritized rather than staying competitive within the market. However, when there is pressure from the market and shareholders in the company forcing decisions to be made prioritizing competitiveness, it is up to Boeing to ensure safety even while pursuing this. To an extent, they were able to do this. The MCAS system is not inherently unsafe, but the following points highlight the unethical design decisions made while implementing this. The ethical decision to the second question would also clearly be yes, Boeing should disclose the use of MCAS to their customers. It is here that an ethical boundary was crossed. MCAS is a major system update to the 737 Max that should require pilot training; however, Boeing executives promised no pilot training to airlines to boost their sales [3]. This dishonest sales tactic and the omission of the system in pilot handbooks does make this decision an unethical one. This decision ignores the potential impact on stakeholders such as pilots, passengers, airlines, etc. in favor of higher profits. This is worsened by the fact that the plane would have remained competitive against the A320neo even without this statement. Lastly, FAA should not allow Boeing to internally regulate itself. A main reason the MCAS system’s impact was not fully known to regulators at FAA was because it was basically ‘prescreened’ by FAA regulators who work for Boeing, which is a clear conflict of interest [5]. FAA as a government agency should be impartial to all companies, regardless of their dominance in domestic industry such as Boeing. This oversight and leniency by the FAA can also be labeled an unethical practice. 


#### References 
[1] Herkert, Joseph, et al. “The Boeing 737 MAX: Lessons for Engineering Ethics.” Science and Engineering Ethics, vol. 26, no. 6, 10 July 2020, pp. 2957–2974, link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11948-020-00252-y, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11948-020-00252-y.

[2] Skybrary. “Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS).” SKYbrary Aviation Safety, 29 May 2021, skybrary.aero/articles/maneuvering-characteristics-augmentation-system-mcas.

[3] Devine, Curt, and Drew Griffin. “First on CNN: Despite Crashes, Boeing Proposes No Simulator Training for 737 MAX Pilots.” CNN, 30 May 2019, www.cnn.com/2019/05/30/politics/737-max-computer-simulator.

[4] 